Hey everyone and thanks for jumping back
into the macroverse.
Today we're going to talk about the most
recent CPI report as headline inflation
has risen up to around 3.8%. If you guys
like the content, make sure you
subscribe to the channel, give the video
a thumbs up, and also check out
bjamanc.com.
We do have a sale going on right now on
ITC Premium. Let's go ahead and jump in.
So, the inflation rate year-over-year
has risen up to almost 4%, right? It's
back up to 3.78. And the issue right now
is that this is mostly a supply driven
issue. It's not arguably because of
demand going up, which is what you'll
see early in a business cycle. It is
because of an energy crisis due likely
to the geopolitical conflict in the
Middle East. And so we've seen energy
prices go up and it's actually had a big
effect on the markets. Now you might
think, well, there hasn't really been
that of a big of an effect on the
markets in some ways. You're right.
Right. The S&P 500 is still essentially
at all-time highs. Um, but where it has
had an effect is on higher risk assets
relative to lower risk assets. And that
when you think about the market through
those lens, through that through that
lens,
it actually does start to make a lot
more sense. Um, so take a look at how
the inflation rate has affected rate
cuts. Before we get to the rate cuts,
just so you know, going into this, the
expectation was the inflation rate would
be around like 3.6 3.7 came in a little
bit higher at 3.8. core inflation
expectation was I think around 2627 and
it came in at 2.8. So inflation did
actually come in relatively hot and
because it came in hot,
expectations for rate cuts anytime soon
are essentially non-existent.
Right now the market not only thinks
there will not be a rate cut in 2026,
the market also thinks there will not be
a rate cut in 2027. Now, we'll see if
that actually ends up being true or not.
But what's interesting is that the
market now thinks that it is more likely
that we get a rate hike in 2027 than a
rate cut. Think about the 180 that has
happened here. We went from pricing in
several rate cuts
last year for 2026 to now they're
essentially all priced out. And now
we're starting to price price in rate
hikes. Now with this going on, you might
say, "Well, market's still doing well."
And it's and it is, right? Like there's
still pockets of optimism that the
market has held on to. The S&P M2
correlation still seems intact so far.
But where you're really seeing this show
up in the data is those higher risk
assets relative to the lower risk
assets. So if you look at altcoins total
2 minus USDT divided by Bitcoin, what do
you see?
You see that alts are bleeding against
Bitcoin, right? Bitcoin dominance is
going up. And this is something we've
talked about forever is that crypto is
more sensitive to rate cuts and and
liquidity than the stock market is.
Right? And it's it's much more the
speculation in the crypto market is much
more dubious than it is in the stock
market. We don't have earnings reports
in the crypto market. And if we did,
what would they even say? You know, oh,
we rugged our community only three times
this past quarter, so you know, go by
our altcoin. Doesn't really make a whole
lot of sense. It's more dubious. They're
further up the risk curve. They need
that lower liquidity. They need more
liquidity. They need more rate cuts. And
when you don't get that,
they just keep on bleeding. And this is
a tired narrative. I mean, you're
probably I'm probably just as annoyed
with you are that the that I continue to
say the same stuff. But the reality is
is the market does not care about our,
you know, opinion. This the reality is
is higher risk assets like altcoins
continue to bleed to Bitcoin for the
last five years. And getting tired of
the trend doesn't mean the trend's going
to go away.
So, let's go take a look because when
you look at inflation here, I mean, this
really is starting to move. Hopefully,
it comes back down, but it does start to
make you question, you know, how high
will it go before it starts to come back
down. There are times in history where
you get brief spikes in it and it comes
right back down. But the issue is that
when you look at say like the 70s, if
inflation were to start another major
inflationary wave,
that would have negative consequences
for the stock market just like it did in
2022. So hopefully that's not what
happens. But the the issue that I could
see happening is
the Fed being checkmated. They're not
checkmated yet, right? They were in
check a few a few months ago and I think
they're going to be in check again.
Maybe the next one's going to be of a
discovered check. But the hard part is
that the Federal Reserve has a dual
mandate and that dual mandate is maximum
employment and price stability. Now the
labor market recently has been
cooperating. Right? If you look at at
the unemployment rate, it's been
relatively flat here. You could argue
for almost the last year, right? The
unemployment rate hasn't really moved a
whole lot. And part of the reason for
that is because things like initial
claims remain low and layoffs
remain low, right? They're still at
basically prepandemic levels. But if
that ever picks up, and by the way, it's
a fool's error to try to predict exactly
when that's going to occur. That's why
you'll go crazy trying to predict when
recessions happen. But
when you look at other areas of the
stock or of the labor market like job
openings,
relatively low, quits
relatively low.
Hires actually picked up a little bit
recently,
but it's it's hard to know. Is this just
like a a one-off move or is it is it a
start of a new trend? So, here's what I
could foresee happening.
Because the Fed is unable to carry out
the rate cuts they previously had
planned, it might actually increase the
odds of a hard landing eventually. That
doesn't mean it's going to happen
tomorrow, right? But it does increase
the odds of a hard landing as time goes
on because if they're unable to get
those, you could argue necessary rate
cuts in to help support the labor
market, then it's more likely that the
labor market would then start to weaken
further. And the issue right now, you
could argue, is the, you know, the
administration wants rate cuts, but
they're essentially shooting themselves
in the foot because they're like, well,
give us rate cuts, but also, hey, here's
an energy crisis, and now we got to deal
with that. The Fed has to also make sure
they don't cut too soon. Because if they
cut too soon, you're just going to get
inflation running hot again like it did
in 2022.
So, doesn't does it make sense for the
Fed to go cut a 100 basis points and
just fuel a second round of inflation
just to save the labor market? They're
deciding no. And I mean, it's hard like
you I know we're all armchair
economists, but imagine you're at the
Fed and you're watching this energy
crisis unfold. Inflation's going up. The
unemployment rate has been flat
essentially for the last year. What
reason do they have to cut? The reason
was there a few months ago. If the
inflation rate were still sort of slowly
trending to 2%, I absolutely think you
could justify rate cuts, I think they
would have already cut rates in 2026 had
the energy crisis not happened. But that
is not where we find ourselves. If you
look at the inflation rate
year-over-year
uh per category, food and beverages has
ticked up back above 3%. Housing also
went up and that's one of the reasons
why the inflation rate came in so hot is
housing makes up a large percentage of
CPI and that actually increased from
around 3.37 to 3.63%. So if that had
gone down a little like if it had
continued with the prior trend it it the
CPI would have been a lot better but it
wasn't. I mean it came in hot. Apparel
continues to go back up back up to 4%.
And transportation is is all the way
back above almost seven. I mean it's at
6.89. 8 9% approaching 7%.
Transportation inflation hasn't been
this high since 2022. So, you know, you
have to at least start asking the
questions, well, when is this
inflationary spike going to actually
end? If you look at medical care, that
one remains low. Recreation uh remains
pretty much okay. Education and
communication is fine. And then other
goods and services went up from around
3.77 to 4.44. The other thing to look at
is core inflation that also came in a
little hot. Um, as I said previously, we
were looking at the uh the on the
dashboard there. Core inflation looks
like it found a low back in February at
2.47. Then it went to 2.6. Now it's at
2.74.
Is this turning a corner as well? Like
there are there is precedent for core
inflation coming down and then spiking
back up, right? there's precedent for
it. That doesn't mean it has to, but
it's crazy not to at least consider it
because none of us actually know. Like I
imagine the number of geopolitical
experts actually watching this channel
right now is a lot is very very low,
right? Like I I don't I'm not a
geopolitical expert. I imagine you're
probably not one, but for the few are my
apologies. I'm not a geopolitical
expert. I have no idea when this stuff
is going to actually end. the
geopolitical conflicts um the the crisis
over there. But I will say this, I will
say from a pure macro business cycle
perspective,
historically it is inflation. It is the
it is the the rise of oil in a late
business cycle environment that causes
the end of the business cycle because
the Fed gets checkmated. Again, the
chess analogy is pretty simple. If
you're playing chess and you create one
weakness against your opponent, they can
defend it. So if the labor market is
weak, the Fed can lower rates. If the
inflation rate is going up, the Fed can
raise rates. They can defend one
weakness. But if you have two
weaknesses, if you have the inflation
rate going up and the unemployment rate
going up, that is not as easy to defend
and then the def the defense breaks down
and then you end up checkmating your
opponent. And that's the issue with the
macro is that the Fed could be heading
in that direction of being checkmated.
We're not there yet. In order to get
there, the labor market would have to
show weakness. And the labor market is
unlikely to show weakness as long as the
stock market remains at all-time highs.
That doesn't mean the unemployment rate
can't start trending back up. I mean, it
has for the last several years, but I
doubt that you go into the nonlinear
phase of the unemployment rate going up
until you get more durable
prices by assets that are down, you
know, that that are lower. Once you get
lower asset prices, that then tends to
correspond to the nonlinear increase in
the unemployment rate. We're simply not
there yet. And I've said before, if
you're if you're looking for a signal,
initial claims, right? They're currently
at 200k probably for the last three or
four years. I've said, look, it's not a
recession until this is at 300K. Once
they're at 300K, I think you're you're
in a recession at that point. We also
have a recession risk dashboard that you
can actually get access to. We've had
this for the last several years on the
on the platform and it's it has remained
low for a long time. This is a macro
recession historical summary risk. It
takes into account employment, national
income and product and production and
business. You can also add in interest
rates uh if you want. And you can see
that the recession risk has remained
relatively low for the last several
years, but it can do that, right? I
mean, it can certainly do that between
recessions. That doesn't mean you won't
eventually get one. So, we'll see how
the macro continues to unfold, but you
know, to me, right now, it looks like
you have the inflation rate going up,
the labor market holding steady. If the
labor market were to show weakness, then
that could lead to some more problems
because then how does the Fed come to
the rescue with the inflationary spike
going on? And by the way, we don't know
exactly if we felt all the effects from
tariffs either. I mean, I think those
are, you know, those are obviously still
up in the air. Um, I I don't think
that's as big of a risk as as what we're
seeing with the energy crisis, but I
don't I mean, I'm again, I'm not I'm not
an expert on geopolitics and and how
that kind of stuff can can, you know,
can affect the markets, but I will say
that when you have an inflation rate
going up in a late business cycle
environment that basically causes the
Fed's hand to be hands to be tied,
that's usually not the best outcome or
for the markets. Now, here's the thing.
with the S&P continuing to put in new
all-time highs, you could argue that
it's actually really bullish for energy
stocks. And the reason I say that is
because historically energy topped after
the stock market in a late business
cycle environment, right? So, if you
overlay XLE onto the chart, you can see
that in 2000, even in 2022, the stock
market topped. XLE didn't top until like
six months later, right? All right. And
then if you go back even further,
if you look at um the financial crisis,
what do you notice? You'll see that the
stock market topped in October of 2007.
XLE didn't top until May of 2008. If you
look at the stock market and the dot
crash, the stock market topped in March
of 2000. XLE arguably didn't top until
at least October of 2000, but it looks
like it even went a little bit higher as
late as May of 2001. So,
I'm not saying you just have to sit in
cash at the end of a business cycle. I
mean, I still have exposure to all sorts
of stuff. Uh, the energy sector being
one of them as well as other
international markets, but it is it does
go to show just how how the business
cycle does play out and how you should
have sort of a macro view when looking
at this stuff. I think index funds are
fine over the long term,
but at the same time,
you got to be careful about, you know,
what index funds you're buying. you want
to buy. Again, not enough financial
advice, but historically index funds
with low expense ratios tend to do
better than ones with high expense
ratios in the sense that even if the
ones you're buying have high expense
ratios, if they outperform the market,
often times the managers of those funds,
the fees that they're taking are
offsetting the outperformance that they
get. So, the bottom line to you isn't
really necessarily any better than just
buying the S&P 500. Um, but the the
problem I think for for the for the
market that that will happen likely is,
you know, is the fact that you have a
rising inflation rate at the same time
where you could start to see that labor
market weakness unfold. And because
crypto is further up the risk curve,
it's a little bit more sensitive to this
stuff than, you know, than traditional
markets. And again, I mean, this stuff
could be somewhat daunting in terms of
like how long this stuff can often play
out, but if you look at like the S&P
divided by M2, which is something we've
talked about for like the last four
years, and again, looking at just how
long it took to play out in sort of the
last business cycle,
I expect this will break, but guess
what? It hasn't broken yet. And this is
the thing that like I think back to in
the '9s is like there there must have
been plenty of times where people
thought the bubble was popping
and it just kept not popping. But then
eventually
it did pop. And by the time it did, I
have to imagine that everyone that had
expressed any concern for it popping had
probably given up on it ever popping.
And yet it still eventually did pop.
So,
this is a tough market, right? It's a
tough market. Um,
again, energy is still doing well.
Manufacturing still doing well. I think
metals are probably going to do well
again as well. Maybe uh as we get on
into the second half of this year,
potentially gold doing well. Silver I I
don't really think is going to pick back
up in any durable fashion until maybe
next year, 2028. But gold could pick up
sooner. But guys, those are my thoughts.
Uh, let me know what you guys think.
Inflation's back up 3.8%. Hopefully,
it's it's a it's a one-off move and
doesn't continue. But who's to who's to
say when the geopolitical conflict and
the energy crisis will resolve? If you
guys like the content, make sure you
subscribe to the channel, give the video
a thumbs up, and also check out the
sale. Uh, you can find that sale on ITC
premium at benjingkowan.com. I'll see
you guys next time. Bye.